[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other night. I dreamed that I was in the royal court of the great
[Amit Varma]: Indian empire and India's ruler, the mighty Emperor Modi had sent for me. I entered his
[Amit Varma]: special meeting room along with a handful of his other special advisors. Emperor Modi
[Amit Varma]: told us to sit down. Emperor Modi looked very grim.
[Amit Varma]: Mitro, he said to us, look at this map here. We are surrounded by the Chinese. And indeed
[Amit Varma]: on the wall was a map of South Asia and India was like an island surrounded by a sea of
[Amit Varma]: red. The Chinese have taken over all the other
[Amit Varma]: countries around us, he said. Pakistan, Burma, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka, they
[Amit Varma]: all belong to China now. And they have turned their eyes on us. They have sent a delegation
[Amit Varma]: here which is waiting in the next room. The moment I meet them, Mitro, they will demand
[Amit Varma]: that I surrender. They have a better army, a better air force, more nuclear bombs, even
[Amit Varma]: the one is enough. And they also have better infrastructure, though I don't know why that's
[Amit Varma]: relevant. Anyway, if I don't surrender, they will just conquer us. What to do?
[Amit Varma]: He looked at me and said, Amit, help me. You have always been the wisest man in this kingdom.
[Amit Varma]: Not just the best looking and the sexiest, not just the most virile and wittiest, but
[Amit Varma]: also the wisest. Come to my rescue, oh wise Amit. You alone can save India.
[Amit Varma]: He put his head on the table and began weeping. I touched his elbow gently in that sensuous
[Amit Varma]: way that women can never resist and that gives comfort to all emperors.
[Amit Varma]: Ram Modi, I said, don't worry, I have a plan. Give me thirty minutes to get ready and then
[Amit Varma]: I will walk into that meeting with you. He looked up at me with hope shining through
[Amit Varma]: in his Labrador-like eyes. I always believed in you, Amit, he said. You are as smart as
[Amit Varma]: you are gorgeous. Take your time and save the Indian empire.
[Amit Varma]: I got up and left the room. Half an hour later, I returned with a tiffin box in my hand.
[Amit Varma]: Let us go to meet the Chinese, I said to Emperor Modi. I am ready for them.
[Amit Varma]: We walked into the room where the Chinese were waiting for us. They were introduced
[Amit Varma]: to us and then the main Chinese envoy said to Emperor Modi, I demand you surrender.
[Amit Varma]: I raised my hand. Wait a minute, I said. First, I request you taste this.
[Amit Varma]: I handed him the tiffin box. He opened it suspiciously. What is it, he asked.
[Amit Varma]: It's Chinese food, I said. He whipped out a pair of chopsticks from his
[Amit Varma]: head where they had been holding up his hair and his silken tresses tumbled down upon his
[Amit Varma]: slender shoulders like the first blossoms of spring. I had to admit, he was almost as
[Amit Varma]: sexy as me. He put the chopsticks in the tiffin box and
[Amit Varma]: took a bite. A look of disgust swept across his face. He took another bite and chewed
[Amit Varma]: it silently deep in thought. Then he drank an entire bottle of water and finally he looked
[Amit Varma]: at me. What is this monstrosity, he said. What did
[Amit Varma]: I just eat? This is called Gobi Manchurian, I said. It's
[Amit Varma]: a Chinese dish. He looked down at the tiffin box and then
[Amit Varma]: suddenly hurled it at the wall which was now splattered with Gobi Manchurian like a Jackson
[Amit Varma]: Pollock painting. Then he looked at Emperor Modi.
[Amit Varma]: To win, he said to Emperor Modi, we will not invade India, but I have just one condition.
[Amit Varma]: Emperor Modi was delighted at this news. Oh, balle balle, he said. What is this condition?
[Amit Varma]: The Chinese envoy looked at me and then back at the Emperor and then he hissed, stop messing
[Unknown]: with Chinese food. Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly
[Amit Varma]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioural science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. This week's episode is about foreign policy. Recently
[Amit Varma]: there's been much talk about China's growing influence in our neighbourhood, which it is
[Amit Varma]: assumed comes at India's expense. To discuss the seen and unseen effects of this, I have
[Amit Varma]: with me on the show Pranay Kotasthane, a foreign policy expert from the Takshashila Institution
[Amit Varma]: in Bengaluru. Pranay, welcome to the show. Thanks Amit, good to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay, these days I'm hearing a lot of alarmist noises about China's growing influence in
[Amit Varma]: India's immediate neighbourhood and people are saying that that'll diminish India's influence
[Amit Varma]: and in foreign policy terms, that could hurt us. Now you're my resident foreign policy
[Amit Varma]: expert, so to say, what do you feel about it? Are these fears justified?
[Guest]: Okay, yeah, Amit. First and foremost, it is true that Chinese influence is increasing.
[Guest]: China has gotten itself involved in almost all the states in India's neighbourhood. It
[Guest]: is doing big projects in Pakistan. There's something called the China-Pakistan Economic
[Guest]: Corridor, CPEC. Similarly, it has engagements in building a port in Sri Lanka. There are
[Guest]: military ties developing between China and Bangladesh. Nepal is again sort of the ties
[Guest]: are warming up. So, that is true that China's influence in India's neighbourhood is definitely
[Guest]: increasing. And bigger question for me is, should India be worried? And the seen effect
[Guest]: is yes, India's influence might decrease in that countries and that is probably to an
[Guest]: extent true. Because if you go back in history, a lot of the treaties that were signed, especially
[Guest]: between India and its smaller neighbours, like say Nepal, Bhutan, the treaties which
[Guest]: were signed were sort of trying to suggest that these two countries have very close relationships
[Guest]: and India will help them in times of distress. And so, India did a lot to these countries
[Guest]: and in exchange, sort of it was believed that this is a zone of influence where India is
[Guest]: the primary power. So, there is a very popular term in foreign policy literature called the
[Guest]: Monroe Doctrine, which just says that in a particular area, one big power is the predominant
[Guest]: foreign policy actor and no other big foreign policy actor from another region in the world
[Guest]: can play a big role here because this area does not belong to you. So, a lot of this
[Guest]: idea about India's neighbourhood, you know, people in fact used to use terms like India's
[Guest]: own backyard, China is coming in India's own backyard. It is not your backyard. These are
[Guest]: sovereign states. These are not your backyard. And in fact, it has, over the last few years,
[Guest]: once economy has opened up, all these small states are very free to do, engage other big
[Guest]: powers and now that there is a close country in the neighbourhood called China, which also
[Guest]: is a big superpower, it is perfectly natural that these countries will try to engage and
[Guest]: they will also try to play India against China in their own region. In fact, the former NSA
[Guest]: Shiv Shankar Menon did say this in one of his famous interviews that this is something
[Guest]: that India has to get used to and it is very natural for small states to play two big powers
[Guest]: against each other and that is exactly what they are doing. So, we should come out of
[Guest]: this sort of mentality that these are countries in India's backyard or the India's Monroe
[Guest]: Doctrine applies, there is nothing like it. So, that is sort of the seen effect. So, yes,
[Guest]: influence is decreasing, but so what, there is very little we could do.
[Guest]: Another important point is we did need these countries 20-30 years back to a great extent
[Guest]: because India's primary competitor in our region was Pakistan. Back then Pakistan was
[Guest]: growing really well, right. And that time, because Pakistan was using violent non-state
[Guest]: actors in through these countries, India did need to have relationships much beyond the
[Guest]: economic domain so that these countries could not be used by Pakistan to get terrorists
[Guest]: in and that is why India did a lot with Nepal, Bangladesh, etcetera.
[Guest]: But now times have changed. Pakistan is no longer the primary competitor in our area,
[Guest]: it is China. And once China is the big power, it is the economic might that China brings
[Guest]: in apart from its military strength as well. But on the economic count, India is still
[Guest]: weak here, right. So, there is, if these countries are going to get a better deal with China,
[Guest]: they are going to agree to that more than India. So, until and unless India reaches
[Guest]: an economic strength as much as China, we cannot do much there.
[Amit Varma]: So, to sum up the scene effect, you would say that yes, China's influence is growing
[Amit Varma]: in our neighborhood or what we used to call our backyard, quote unquote. But A, that's
[Amit Varma]: inevitable because all of these countries are opening their economies up and China being
[Amit Varma]: one of the world's big economies is bound to happen and B, it should not concern us
[Amit Varma]: so much because they are no longer of the same kind of strategic significance they were
[Amit Varma]: when Pakistan was using them as a conduit or, you know, a wire route for all kinds of
[Amit Varma]: non-state actions. What are the unseen effects of China's growing influence in the neighborhood
[Guest]: though?
[Guest]: Yeah. Before that, if I could just add another scene effect of this is. So, the point that
[Guest]: I'm trying to make is it's not that we should cut off from these countries. These countries
[Guest]: are important just because they are in our neighborhood and again Pakistan might come
[Guest]: back. So, we do not want to sort of totally cut off, but we do not want to be overly concerned
[Guest]: with China's growing involvement as well. And second important point is that why do
[Guest]: we need foreign policy? We finally need foreign policy because we want prosperity for all
[Guest]: Indians right. And if that is the aim of all foreign policy, these small states cannot
[Guest]: do much in terms of achieving that aim at this particular moment. Probably they might
[Guest]: become more strategically important later and a lot of our growth can actually be achieved
[Guest]: with getting things right domestically. And so, it's better that we focus our energies
[Guest]: in that rather than worrying overly about this.
[Guest]: Now, coming to the unseen effect. One sort of the unseen effect is that again there is
[Guest]: enough foreign policy literature which says that the dominant power which gets involved
[Guest]: in a small state soon gets seen in a negative manner because it's seen everywhere, there
[Guest]: will be antagonism, they'll say why are these big countries coming into our area. So, that
[Guest]: is perfectly natural. And China has an unenviable reputation of making enemies this way. It
[Guest]: has done so in Africa, in Pakistan also there are a lot of people opposing that and I'm
[Guest]: sure it's going to do that in these small states as well. So, until now India was doing
[Guest]: a lot for these countries but still India was seen negatively. So, now let China bear
[Guest]: the brunt of this. So, and India can lie low for some time in its neighborhood, try to
[Guest]: get things right domestically while engaging these countries on at least some important
[Guest]: issues so that terrorism etc doesn't come back. But that's it, we don't need to be overly
[Amit Varma]: worried otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: So, you say unseen effect number one is that China despite its growing influence would
[Amit Varma]: also develop a worse image just by virtue of being the big foreign power and we've even
[Amit Varma]: seen that in the context of the USA where so much of Trump's rhetoric was against China
[Amit Varma]: and not so much against India because China is simply much bigger in the scheme of things.
[Amit Varma]: And the second unseen effect you would say is the opportunity cost. The more we obsess
[Amit Varma]: with and focus about foreign policy in our neighborhood, the less attention and time
[Amit Varma]: we actually have to give to our own domestic problems and you'd say that look ultimately
[Amit Varma]: it comes down to the prosperity of our people and we should look inwards first and sort
[Amit Varma]: our own problems out before worrying about China's influence in Bangladesh and so on
[Guest]: and so forth.
[Guest]: Yeah, agree and probably we need to in fact go a step further and see how can we leverage
[Guest]: China's growth for India's economy, right. So, what if China is looking for investment,
[Guest]: why not use that for our own purpose, right.
[Amit Varma]: So illustrate that for me.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, for example, China is talking about one belt, one road and belt and road initiatives.
[Guest]: As long as this leads to development of low cost infrastructure because now the investment
[Guest]: opportunities in China, the returns are drying up. So, they are looking for places outside.
[Guest]: So, that's why the investment in this belt and road and in Pakistan, etc. So, why not
[Guest]: we utilize that for financing our own infrastructure as well. As long as it is not critical infrastructure,
[Guest]: why should we be bothered about China building roads or China building metro coaches for
[Guest]: example. So, we should be thinking about how to leverage China rather than we being worried
[Guest]: about China's influence in some of our neighboring countries.
[Amit Varma]: This is incredibly cunning. So, China goes out there and gets a bad name because they
[Amit Varma]: are the big foreign power. And meanwhile, we leverage their entry and do our own sneaky
[Amit Varma]: little things and build our own prosperity.
[Guest]: Yes, that is the aim of our foreign policy. So, why should we get stuck to these old notions
[Guest]: of our own backyard? What will we do? China will be the big power in Bangladesh. Yeah,
[Guest]: so what? It's a sovereign country, let them do what they want. They'll soon realize and
[Guest]: it's not just that China is big power in this equation and hence it will be seen negatively.
[Guest]: Chinese have proven this over the years. In any country they go, the way they engage with
[Guest]: the country they are in, they make enemies much faster than India or US can. So, they'll
[Amit Varma]: do it. So, why should we be bothered about it?
[Amit Varma]: This is what I call both realistic and positive thinking. Pranay, thank you so much. It's
[Amit Varma]: always enlightening to have you on the show. And I'm deeply grateful that you chose to
[Guest]: come into my backyard.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Bye-bye.
[Unknown]: Bye-bye.